Chapter 13 (#13)
Andarist/total-typescript-book: book-content/chapters/13-modules-scripts-declaration-files.md

In this chapter, we'll be diving deeper into modules. First, we'll look at how TypeScript understands global scope by looking at the distinction between 'modules' and 'scripts'. Second, we'll look at declaration files - `.d.ts files` - and introduce the `declare` keyword.

## Understanding Modules and Scripts

> TypeScript has two ways of understanding what a `.ts` file is. It can be treated either as a module, containing imports and exports, or a script, which executes in the global scope.

Author: 😉 
```suggestion
JavaScript has two ways of understanding what a `.js` file is. It can be treated either as a module, containing imports and exports, or a script, which executes in the global scope.
```

Author: I know that you mentioned later that modules are available in JS and all - but a few paragraphs at the beginning here make it sound like it's a TS feature and maybe even that somehow it crept to JS or something. I feel like it's not emphasized enough that it's the other way around.

Now, when we import the `musicPlayer.js` file into a TypeScript file, the error will be resolved, and we can use the `playTrack` function as expected:

```typescript
// inside of app.ts

import { playTrack } from "./musicPlayer";

const track = {
  title: "Otha Fish",
  artist: "The Pharcyde",
  duration: 322,
};

playTrack(track);
```

Types and interfaces can also be declared and exported in declaration files:

```tsx
// inside of musicPlayer.d.ts
export interface Track {
  title: string;
  artist: string;
  duration: number;
}

export function playTrack(track: Track): void;
```

Just like in `.ts` files, these can also be imported and used in other TypeScript files:

```tsx
// inside of app.ts

import { Track, playTrack } from "./musicPlayer";
```

It's important to note that declaration files are not checked against the JavaScript files they describe. We can very easily make a mistake in our declaration file, such as changing `playTrack` to `playTRACK`, and TypeScript won't complain.

So, describing JavaScript files by hand can be error-prone - and not usually recommended.

### Declaration Files Can Add To The Global Scope

> Just like regular TypeScript files, declaration files can be treated as either modules or scripts based on whether or not the `export` keyword is used. In the example above, `musicPlayer.d.ts` is treated as a module because it includes the `export` keyword.

Author: I'm honestly not sure if `export` is enough for declaration files to be treated as modules. But maybe it is and the effect I'm going to show is caused by something else...

Despite `export` being present in the declaration file you can still import just *anything* available identifier from it: [TS playground](https://www.typescriptlang.org/play/?filetype=d.ts#code/C4TwDgpgBAYg9nKBeKBvAUFLUBmCBcUAzsAE4CWAdgOboC+66EAHmHKcFKJFAEICGpZGkzYARoMKUArgFsxEUvUYATCAGMANoOg5pldcHJxKXCCQAUASkIA3OORWNysthzSwEUfkSgAlCEp+WQgVeEQ6XFI4WSgAcgA6AHoqMGlgOPQkpOxcgD0AfmdXdk5UMxJvX1JA4NCAFXNOSJxo2MSUyjSMrJzcrEKgA). It doesn't feel very modele-y ;p

You can "fix" it by including `export {}` in the file: [TS playground](https://www.typescriptlang.org/play/?filetype=d.ts#code/C4TwDgpgBAYg9nKBeKBvAUFLUBmCBcUAzsAE4CWAdgOboC+66EAHmHKcFKJFAEICGpZGkzYARoMKUArgFsxEUvUYATCAGMANoOg5pldcHJxKXCCQAUASkIA3OORWMWbDmjoBuRuVmvOqWAQofiIoACUISn5ZCBV4RDpcUjhZKAByADoAeiowaWA09Cys7FKAPQB+b192fzMSYNDSSOjYgBVzTkScZNTMnMo8gqKS0qxKoA)

> This means that without an `export`, declaration files can be used to add types to the global scope. Even setting `moduleDetection` to `force` won't change this behavior - `moduleDetection` is always set to `auto` for `.d.ts` files.

Author: The thing I mentioned above raises the question wheter this sentence is correct or not. But like I mentioned, I'm not exactly sure 🤷

```

Just like normal declaration files, the types you add are not checked against the actual module - so it's important to keep them up to date.

### Module Augmentation vs Module Overriding

When using `declare module`, you can either augment an existing module or override it completely. Augmenting a module means appending new types to an existing module. Overriding a module means replacing the existing types with new ones.

Choosing which you're doing depends on whether you're inside a module or a script.

#### Inside a Module, `declare module` Augments

If you're inside a module, `declare module` will augment the targeted module. For instance, you can add a new type to the `express` module:

```typescript
// inside express.d.ts
declare module "express" {
  export interface MyType {
    hello: string;
  }
}

export {}; // Adding an export turns this .d.ts file into a module
```

Now, across our project, we can import `MyType` from the `express` module:

```typescript
// anywhere.ts
import { MyType } from "express";
```

We don't need to put this in a declaration file. We can get exactly the same behavior by changing `express.d.ts` to `express.ts`.

> This example is a little bit silly - there's no real use case for adding your own type to a module. But we'll see later that augmenting the types of modules can be extremely useful.

Author: It can be nice to include some types that were not exported by that module. It's surely a somewhat confusing hack but gives u some meaning and colocation so I can see how people could like it.

```ts
// anywhere.ts
import { Express } from "express"; // red squiggly line under "Express"
```

Just like module augmentation, we can get the same behavior by changing `express.d.ts` to `express.ts` (if `moduleDetection` is set to `auto`).

So, just the presence or absence of an `export` statement can radically change the behavior of `declare module`.

Overriding is occasionally useful when you want to completely replace the types of a module, perhaps when a third-party library has incorrect types.

## Declaration Files You Don't Control

You might think that declaration files are a relatively niche feature of TypeScript. But in every project you create, you're likely using hundreds of declaration files. They either ship with libraries, or come bundled with TypeScript itself.

### TypeScript's Types

Whenever you use TypeScript, you're also using JavaScript. JavaScript has many built-in constants, functions and objects that TypeScript needs to know about. A classic example are the array methods.

```ts
const numbers = [1, 2, 3];

numbers.map((n) => n * 2);
```

> Let's step back for a minute. How does TypeScript know that `.map` exists on an array? How does it know that `.map` exists, but `.transform` doesn't? Where is this defined

Author: ```suggestion
Let's step back for a minute. How does TypeScript know that `.map` exists on an array? How does it know that `.map` exists, but `.transform` doesn't? Where is this defined?
```

As it turns out, TypeScript ships with a bunch of declaration files that describe the JavaScript environment. We can do a 'go to definition' on `.map` to see where that is:

```ts
// inside lib.es5.d.ts

interface Array<T> {
  // ... other methods ...
  map<U>(
    callbackfn: (value: T, index: number, array: T[]) => U,
    thisArg?: any,
  ): U[];
}
```

We've ended up in a file called `lib.es5.d.ts`. This file is part of TypeScript, and describes what JavaScript looked like in ES5, a version of JavaScript from 2009. This is when `.map` was introduced to JavaScript.

Another example would be `.replaceAll` on strings:

```ts
const str = "hello world";

str.replaceAll("hello", "goodbye");
```

Doing a 'go to definition' on `.replaceAll` will take you to a file called `lib.es2021.string.d.ts`. This file describes the string methods that were introduced in ES2021.

Looking at the code in `node_modules/typescript/lib`, you'll see dozens of declaration files that describe the JavaScript environment.

> Understanding how to navigate these declaration files can be very useful for fixing type errors. Take a few minutes to explore what's in `lib.es5.d.ts` by using 'go to definition' to navigate around.

Author: For funsies... one could swap out all lib files and use a custom module describing even how an `Array` interface should look like and more. There are options to do that :D I'd really expect that there would be dragons if you'd do that for some very core functionality though. Although internally, TS always tries to load those definitions from the used lib files.

### `skipLibCheck`

As we've seen, your project can contain hundreds of declaration files. By default, TypeScript considers these files as part of your project. So, it checks them for type errors every single time.

This can result in extremely frustrating situations where a type error in a third-party library can prevent your project from compiling.

To avoid this, TypeScript has a `skipLibCheck` setting. When set to `true`, TypeScript will skip checking declaration files for type errors.

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "skipLibCheck": true
  }
}
```

This is a must-have in any TypeScript project because of the sheer number of declaration files that are included. Adding this setting speeds up compilation and prevents unnecessary errors.

#### The Downsides of `skipLibCheck`

`skipLibCheck` comes with one enormous downside, though. It doesn't just skip declaration files in `node_modules` - it skips _all_ declaration files.

This means that if you make a mistake authoring a declaration file, TypeScript won't catch it. This can lead to bugs that are difficult to track down.

> This is one of my main gripes with TypeScript - `skipLibCheck` is a must-have, because of the danger of incorrect third-party declaration files. But it also makes authoring your own declaration files much harder.

Author: Playing devil's advocate - if your 3rd party declaration file has an error and you suppress it... how do you know that it won't affect u in some under-specified way? You are effectively rolling a die at this point to see when and how it might affect you.
